Skip to Content
Menu
Search
Search
Account
Cart
Shopping Cart
You have no items in your shopping cart.
Home  Understanding Beef Carcass Yields and Losses During Processing
ARTICLES
Understanding Beef Carcass Yields and Losses During Processing
Understanding the factors involved in estimating the amount of beef derived from the live animal will assist cattle producers who directly market their beef.
Save for later  Print Share   
Updated: November 25, 2025
Skip to the end of the images gallery

Hanging beef carcasses in a cooler

Skip to the beginning of the images gallery

Having a beef animal custom butchered for personal home consumption has been a long-standing and common practice among beef producers in the United States. These producers are now marketing their animals directly to consumers for "freezer beef." Consumers are purchasing quarters, halves, and even whole beef animals for their own use at home in response to the "local" and "slow" food movements. The organization Buy Fresh Buy Local in Pennsylvania is just one of the many groups across the United States that help educate consumers on locations where they can support local agriculture by purchasing and enjoying locally grown commodities.

In most cases of purchases for freezer beef, there is still a middleman, so to speak, that is necessary to consult with. Most cattle producers utilize small, local meat processors to assist with marketing their commodity. Producers must maintain a good working relationship and open communication with their local butchers to ensure that their product is handled in a manner that will facilitate repeat sales. Offering consumers certain cuts of beef, for example, that the meat processor is unwilling or unable to provide, could be quite problematic for gaining repeat customers. Properly communicate your needs as a producer and the desires of your consumers to the meat processor. The latter task is probably one of the hardest issues related to the direct marketing of beef cattle. Knowing what cutting services and packaging options, if any, the local butcher provides is an important first step in assisting the consumer in understanding the meat cuts or products they may want from the animal they are purchasing. No consumer likes surprise fees tacked on to an ever-increasing bill for food commodities. Be sure to communicate current fees up-front with both the meat processor and the purchaser of the beef animal.

Regardless of the numerous reasons for the success of this niche beef market, some consumers are still confused by the amount and type of beef products they receive when purchasing directly marketed cattle. The Wendy's catchphrase "Where's the Beef?" from the mid-1980s may come to mind for some consumers when they receive their recent purchase of freezer beef. In many cases, novice purchasers of freezer beef may simply not be aware that they may only have 500 lbs of meat or less when they paid for an animal weighing over 1100 lbs. Still, more experienced customers may feel that they have not received the entire product they purchased, as the amount of product received varies from purchase to purchase. A logical scenario could be the following: Last year, a family received nearly 500 pounds of beef from a local beef producer. This year, after much consultation with the meat processor regarding certain 'new' boneless beef cuts that the customer had learned about, the same family received only 350 pounds of beef from a similar-sized animal as last year. Both types of consumers, the novice and repeat customer, can be greatly assisted by understanding the variation in amounts of beef certain animal types produce and by knowing the differences in the amount of beef gained or lost through processing procedures (bone-in versus boneless) alone.

Generally, most cattle have an average dressing percentage of 63 percent. This means that a beef animal weighing 1,000 lbs will result in a carcass that weighs approximately 630 lbs after slaughter. Although the average dressing percentage for beef is 63 percent, several factors may affect the carcass weight. Table 1 below illustrates the variation in carcass weight alone due to the specific factors that affect dressing percentage. Nonetheless, this is the beginning point at which the consumer will see weight loss and variation in the weights of directly purchased beef animals.

Table 1. Factors affecting dressing percent and the expected carcass weights
Live weight
(pounds)	Average Carcass
Weight (pounds)	Heifers 
(immature female)
(pounds)	Dairy Breeds
(56-60% or worse)
(pounds)	Excessively fat /
poorly muscled
(pounds)
1200	756	732	696	660
1100	693	671	638	605
1000	630	610	580	550
900	567	549	522	495

Unlike pork carcasses, beef carcasses are often graded for both yield and quality to help establish the monetary value of the carcass and facilitate the marketability that meets specific consumer demands. Yield grading provides an estimate of the percentage of boneless, closely trimmed retail cuts from the four beef primal cuts (chuck, rib, loin, and round). So, how the beef is fabricated by the meat processor, boneless or bone-in, can provide another and potentially confusing source of variation in how much beef the consumer receives. Yield grades range in score from 1 to 5 and provide only a certain degree of accuracy when estimating cutability, or the amount of saleable beef for a particular carcass. Yield grade is determined by several factors, which include external fat cover, internal organ fat, and degree of muscling, which is measured as ribeye area (in square inches). Yield grade 1 carcasses tend to be leaner and more heavily muscled when compared to the other yield grades, and also provide a greater amount of beef to the consumer when fabricated into retail cuts. Table 2 below provides an estimate of the amount of beef a consumer may expect from certain yield grades, carcass weights, and fabrication styles (boneless or bone-in).

Table 2. Estimates of retail beef amounts to the consumer for varying factors1
Yield Grade	1	2	3	4	5
756 lb carcass (boneless)	415 lbs	393 lbs	378 lbs	363 lbs	340 lbs
756 lb carcass (bone-in)	>600 lbs	582 lbs	544 lbs	506 lbs	<483 lbs
693 lb carcass (boneless)	381 lbs	360 lbs	346 lbs	332 lbs	311 lbs
693 lb carcass (bone-in)	>550 lbs	533 lbs	498 lbs	464 lbs	<443 lbs
630 lb carcass (boneless)	346 lbs	327 lbs	315 lbs	302 lbs	283 lbs
630 lb carcass (bone-in)	>500 lbs	485 lbs	453 lbs	422 lbs	<277 lbs
567 lb carcass (boneless)	311 lbs	294 lbs	283 lbs	272 lbs	255 lbs
567 lb carcass (bone-in)	>450 lbs	436 lbs	408 lbs	379 lbs	<362 lbs

1Weights are approximate and are only meant to explain the sources of variation in carcass types and meat processing methods. Actual weights may vary.

Figure 1 below depicts the location of the four primary cuts (chuck, rib, loin, and round) on the beef carcass, as well as the remaining sub-primal cuts (shank, brisket, plate, and flank). The four beef primal cuts account for more than 75% of the entire carcass weight. Table 3 below provides the breakdown of the cuts of beef and their corresponding percentages.

Table 3. Percentages of primal and sub-primal beef cuts from the carcass1
Beef Cut	Percent of the carcass
Chuck	29%
Round	22%
Loin (including sirloin)	16%
Rib	9%
Plate	9%
Flank	5%
Brisket	4%
Shank	3%

1Remaining percent is organ meat and visceral/organ fat

Understanding the factors involved in estimating the amount of beef derived from the live animal will ultimately assist cattle producers who directly market their beef. It is essential to inform consumers that how they choose to have their beef fabricated into retail cuts can significantly impact the total weight of beef they receive from the meat processor. Cattle producers can ensure that both novice and experienced customers of beef quarters, halves, and whole animals, that neither the producer nor the processor was conspiring to steal meat from them. Both the packer and the producer should strive to provide the safest and most enjoyable eating experience for the consumer. Educating your consumers, listening to their expectations, and providing a consistent beef product will help maintain repeat customers of your healthy and nutritious food source.

Figure 1. Beef Carcass Primal and Sub-primal Cuts
Authors
Jonathan A. Campbell, Ph.D.
Former Meat Extension Specialist
Pennsylvania State University
You may also be interested in ...
ONLINE COURSES
Beef Production and Management
ONLINE COURSES
Introduction to Food Packaging: Materials, Manufacturing, and Innovation
ARTICLES
So You Want to Raise Beef Cattle?
ARTICLES
The Most Valuable Investment in the Beef Herd - The Bull
ARTICLES
Exploring Two Ways to Direct Market in Pennsylvania
ARTICLES
Food for Profit: Food Labels
ARTICLES
Shared Commercial Kitchens In and Around Pennsylvania
ARTICLES
Feeding Beef Cattle
ARTICLES
Resources for Food Entrepreneurs
ARTICLES
Plum Pox Eradication in PA - A Blueprint for Future Plant Disease Outbreaks
Personalize your experience with Penn State Extension and stay informed of the latest in agriculture.
Sign Up for Our Newsletter:
Subscribe

College of Agricultural Sciences

The Pennsylvania State University

323 Agricultural Administration Building

University Park, PA 16802

Penn State Extension on Facebook
Penn State Extension on LinkedIn
Penn State Extension on Twitter
Penn State Extension on YouTube
Instagram
ABOUT EXTENSION
About
Leadership
Careers
Extension News
Press
County Offices
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Help Center
Login Problems
Manage Email Preferences
Contact Us
OTHER PROGRAMS
Pennsylvania 4-H
Better Kid Care
Master Gardeners

YOUTH SAFETY

PRIVACY AND LEGAL STATEMENTS

VETERINARY ADVICE STATEMENT

NON-DISCRIMINATION

ACCESSIBILITY

© 2026 THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY

Ask Tilva