Discover 
English 
Home
Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)
Areas of work
Tools and Data
Impact
Partners
Resources 
FAO’s Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM) is designed to calculate environmental impacts of livestock agrifood systems.

GLEAM enables policymakers, researchers, and project teams to assess the environmental performance of livestock systems and identify pathways for minimizing those impacts and improving the efficiency of natural resource use. Currently, GLEAM simulates greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as well as water use for animal production from buffalo, camels, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, and chickens.

For GHG emissions, GLEAM adopts the IPCC Tier 2 methodology and applies a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) approach, considering both direct farm emissions and indirect emissions throughout the production chain as methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and carbon dioxide (CO2). Water use includes drinking and service water at farm and processing activities as well as water applied to irrigated feed crops.

Quick access
GLEAM v3 Water Use dashboard

This application allows aggregation and visualization of data related to water use and water footprints in livestock agrifood systems, and considers water used for feed production, as well as direct water use for drinking water and service water.

GLEAM v3 Emissions dashboard

This application allows aggregation and visualization of data related to livestock numbers, animal production, greenhouse gas emissions, and emission intensities by region, production systems, and source of emissions.

GLEAM-X interactive web application

Coming soon

GLEAM-X interactive web application is a user-friendly tool that provides access to the Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM).

Did you know?
Better use of energy along supply chains could reduce the overall carbon footprint.


Learn more   

Better manure management practices could ensure the recovery and recycling of nutrients contained in manure.


Learn more   

Better husbandry and health management could reduce the unproductive part of the herd.


Learn more   

Better feeding practices could reduce enteric and manure emissions.


Learn more   

Publications
Enhancing food security and reducing greenhouse gas emissions through dairy modernization in Georgia
2026

This assessment evaluates the outcomes and impacts of the Dairy Modernization and Market Access (DiMMA) programme in Georgia, which aimed to improve the productivity of smallholder dairy farming systems through better nutrition and feeding, veterinary care leading to better animal health, and breed improvements.

The value of animal health innovations for sustainable livestock transformation
2025

Improving animal health is increasingly recognized as a vital pathway for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the global livestock sector while also supporting food security, climate resilience, and animal welfare.

Pathways towards lower emissions
2023

This FAO report presents a comprehensive global assessment of greenhouse gas emissions from livestock systems, utilizing FAO’s Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM) based on the most recent available data.

Multimedia resources
FAO Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)
23/03/2026

FAO’s Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM) is designed to calculate environmental impacts of livestock agrifood systems and help...

FAO LEAP: A global partnership for livestock sustainability
16/04/2024

The FAO Livestock Environmental Assessment and Performance (LEAP) Partnership is a global multi-stakeholder initiative striving for more sustainable...

Livestock and enteric methane
20/10/2022

Burping livestock are a big problem for our planet. When cows and other ruminants eat, their food ferments in their gut and produces methane, which...

Contacts

Please contact our team for any request or information about GLEAM.

info-GLEAM@fao.org

Read now

FAO Releases GLEAM-X R-Package as Open Source

Related links
Global Agenda for Sustainable Livestock
Livestock Environmental Assessment and Performance (LEAP) Partnership
Reducing Enteric Methane for improving food security and livelihoods
Mitigation of Climate Change in agriculture (MICCA)
Gridded Livestock of the World (GLW)
Livestock and the environment
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
FAO Livestock Systems
Domestic Animal Diversity Information System (DAD-IS)
FAO Climate Change
Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture
Hand-in-Hand Geospatial Platform
FAOSTAT
Livestock and enteric methane
FOLLOW US ON
FAO Organizational Chart
Worldwide offices 
Jobs Contact us Terms and Conditions Data protection and privacy Scam Alert Report Misconduct Transparency and accountability Procurement
© FAO 2026