PPDB: Pesticide Properties DataBase	
Home
A to Z: All
A to Z: Insecticides
A to Z: Herbicides
A to Z: Fungicides
A to Z: Other related substances
Search
Support
Edit history
Purchasing and licensing
Industry collaboration
User survey

NEW
- FEAST
Farmland Ecosystem Assessment Support Tool
- Calculated datasets available to purchase

THE PPDB	
Pesticide Properties Database

Welcome of the Pesticide Properties Database (PPDB) website; a comprehensive source of data on pesticide chemical, physical and biological properties. The PPDB can be accessed via this website. Data for other related substances such as adjuvants, biostimulants and wood preservatives are also available in the PPDB. The PPDB is also available via an IUPAC branded portal.

	

Pesticide Properties Database (PPDB): The main PPDB website that includes chemical identity, physicochemical, human health and ecotoxicological data.

Click here to access this database

		

IUPAC PPDB: The IUPAC-branded version of the PPDB. This contains the same information as the main PPDB website but using IUPAC-branded delivery pages.

Click here to access this database

This database has been developed and managed by the Agriculture and Environment Research Unit (AERU) at the University of Hertfordshire for a variety of end users to support risk assessments and risk management.

Note: Please be aware of counterfeit versions of this database available elsewhere. Unauthorised and/or unlicenced copies are not supported or updated.

© Copyright University of Hertfordshire, 2006-2026. All Rights Reserved

Your use of this website and its various databases is subject to the terms detailed in the University of Hertfordshire’s copyright and IPR statement that can be found at https://www.herts.ac.uk/about-us/legal. In addition, your use of this website and its various databases is subject to the terms of this additional Copyright Statement and the database Conditions of use document. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, the content of this website and databases are owned and controlled by the University of Hertfordshire. Site content, including its selection and arrangement, is owned by the University of Hertfordshire and is protected by copyright and other laws. Except as otherwise expressly permitted under copyright law or within the database Conditions of Use document, the content of this site may not be copied, reproduced, republished, downloaded, posted, broadcast or transmitted in any way without first obtaining the University of Hertfordshire’s written permission. By using our databases the user is deemed to have agreed to comply with all of the terms and conditions as described above and within all relevant documentation.

	
© University of Hertfordshire	ALSO AVAILABLE:  THE VSDB  THE BPDB	www.herts.ac.uk/aeru