Foods
Weight Loss App
Nutrition API
Transforming
Weight Loss Through Digital Innovation

For over 18 years, we’ve been empowering millions of people to achieve their weight loss goals with our digital health solutions.

Start Using fatsecret

Use fatsecret on the web? Sign In

Discover fatsecret

Our digital health solutions help people achieve their weight loss goals, find accurate nutrition information, and power global health apps. Through these, we positively impact the weight and health journey of millions of lives around the world.

Weight Loss App
Food Search
Nutrition API
FATSECRET APP | CALORIE COUNTER
Reach Your Weight Loss Goals

Knowing the calories in your food is just the beginning. With our iOS and Android mobile app, you can not only track your food and macros with our calorie counter, but also connect with a supportive community, and receive expert guidance through meal plans and educational resources. The fatsecret app is your companion for successful weight loss. Join millions of users worldwide who trust the fatsecret app to support their journey to a healthier weight.

4.8

App Store

4.7

Play Store

Download the fatsecret App
FOOD SEARCH
Access Nutrition Information Instantly

Looking to find out the nutrition and calorie content of your foods? Our easy to use search tool gives you instant access to accurate nutrition and calorie information for generic foods, branded foods, restaurant foods and supermarket items. With a database of over 1.9 million global verified foods, you can easily stay on track with your weight loss goals by knowing exactly what’s in your food.

Find Facts for a Food
NUTRITION API
Power Your Projects with Our Food API

Enhance your apps with our powerful Nutrition API. Access verified and up-to-date food and nutrition information from the largest global food database. With seamless integration and over 1.9 million verified foods, our nutrition API is trusted by over 35,000 developers worldwide.

Explore Our API
OUR PURPOSE
Individualized and Sustainable Weight Loss

Our mission is to empower anyone to reach their desired weight through individualized and sustainable weight loss, because we envision a world where everyone can achieve their weight loss goals, leading to better health and happiness.

Our Impact

Join a global community committed to healthier living. fatsecret empowers millions of users worldwide with the tools, support and information they need to achieve their weight loss goals.

12.9M
annual active users
56
countries
24
languages
1.9M
verified foods
Explore fatsecret
Search For a Food

Curious about the calories and nutrition in your favorite foods? Use our search tool to find nutrition information on any food instantly.

Enter a food to search
Download the fatsecret App

Track your meals, monitor your progress, and achieve your weight loss goals with our app for iOS and Android.

4.8

4.7

Integrate Our Data

Enhance your apps and services with our verified food and nutrition data.

Learn More
Services
FAQ
Blog
Nutrition API
fatsecret Web
fatsecret Professional
Contact Us
Quick Links
Foods
Food List
Brand List
Recipes
Find People
Fitness
Community
Legal
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
Report Abuse
© 2026 fatsecret. All rights reserved.
United States